---
layout: post
title:  "On the apolitical stance of the EBU"
date:   2025-05-19 00:00:00 +0000
---
The European Broadcasting Company (EBU) for years has touted that the Eurovision Song Contest is apolitical. It's about love, and music, not about politics. The stance is not new, and it has been in place since 2000 or so. This has also been a hypocritical stance since around 2000.

The stance itself is stated clearly in the Title and Values of the Eurovision Song Contest (ESC)<sup><a href="#ref1">1</a></sup>. Stating something, and having it be true, however, are two different things. The hypocrisy of the implementation of this rule is widely known and well documented <sup><a href="#ref2">2</a>, <a href="#ref3">3</a></sup>.

My goal, however, is to look at this from a different lens. 

But first, and to begin, a few notes, specially on the Israel/Palestine controversy (*stricto sensu*). I'm addressing this conflict in light of the recent outcry over Israel participation in Eurovision, the calls for bans and penalties for breaching the apolitical stance (from all sides), and the televote result in the 2025 edition! Regarding the conflict, I honestly believe we're able to find any party guilty, depending on how long or short our timeline of events is. That said, the often preached idea that 'abuses exist from both sides' ignores the reality on the ground. I personally don't feel qualified to take a stance - I don't, nor will I have a definitive opinion on the issue. It's a complex matter that reasonable specialists disagree on, and I'm not a specialist. Here's a few examples to illustrate the complexity of the issue:

Does the Hamas violate International Law? Yes, absolutely. Specifically sections regarding using civilian facilities for military goals. That is in fact a war crime, and Israel is justified in attacking any such infrastructure. But the reality on the terrain is that Israel is also bound by the Proportionality Principle, and ignoring it is also a war crime. What's a proportional response is debatable, but destroying virtually every civilian infrastructure in an area of roughly 365 km square is certainly not proportional response to a terrorist attack that killed 1,139 people. But what is? The USA started a 20 year war on Afghanistan because of the September 11 attacks that killed 2,977 people, and at the beginning no one denied its legitimacy. Is there a threshold between 1,139 and 2,977 where a disproportional response gains legitimacy for a while?

The conflict between Israel and Hamas matter not because the EBU should resolve them, but because it reveals the contradiction in how the EBU applies its apolitical rule. One of the main accusations led against EBU is that it's driven by money, not ideals. The contest is mainly sponsored by Moroccanoil, a company that, ironically, is Israeli, not Moroccan. The EBU had no problems removing Russia from the contest when it invaded Ukraine, but did nothing about Israel, regardless the outcry of the fans. This makes it seem that the apolitical nature of ESC is measured not by actions, but rather by money - sponsored money to be more precise. But the EBU is neither a public company nor a private one. It's a non-profit, non-governmental organization that is ruled under Swiss law<sup><a href="ref4">4</a></sup>. It's an alliance of several networks to help broadcast their programs internationally. Eurovision started as a test drive and tech demo of the live broadcasting across borders.

Herein lies the issue at hand then. It's the members of the EBU that decide. Russia was removed because the majority of the members of the alliance decided it should. Israel is not removed because between all the members of the EBU there is little to no consensus. The Israel/Palestine subject is complex, but it's political. Anti-war is allowed, but is war also not political? Carl von Clausewitz famously stated that war is "the continuation of politics by other means". Gay rights, trans rights, human rights, they're all political, at times forbidden, often allowed.

I don't see the apolitical stance as a *carte blanche* to forbid acts or actions the EBU doesn't like. It's more of a don't-be-controversial stance, more than an apolitical one. Although I don't have a great deal of problems with this, even if I don't agree with it, it opens the ESC to this kind of controversy. I'd much rather discuss the ESC on the merits of the acts than on the merits of a poorly named stance. This also lines up with the 2025 problem the contestant from Malta faced. The lyrics, 99% in english, had one word in Maltese that was banned. Why? Because the singer would say multiple times "serving Kant". If we look at the ruling for this song, as well as the forbidding Palestinian flags - and others - on stage through this lens there's no hypocrisy. The EBU wants the ESC to be about music, not controversy (*latu sensu*). I don't think it's the right stance, but I do understand it better from this perspective.

## References
<p id="ref1">1: European Broadcasting Union. (2025). <i>The rules of the contest 2025</i>. Eurovision.tv. <a href="https://eurovision.tv/about/rules">https://eurovision.tv/about/rules</a></p>
<p id="ref2">2: Wikipedia contributors. (n.d.). <i>Controversies of the Eurovision Song Contest</i>. Wikipedia. Retrieved May 19, 2025, from <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Controversies_of_the_Eurovision_Song_Contest">https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Controversies_of_the_Eurovision_Song_Contest</a></p>
<p id="ref3">3: verilybitchie. (2023, May 5). <i>The [Queer] Politics of Eurovision</i> [Video]. YouTube. <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wnjtzn7ZkCs">https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Wnjtzn7ZkCs</a></p>
<p id="ref4">4: United Nations. (n.d.). <i>European Broadcasting Union (EBU) – Profile</i>. United Nations Civil Society Database. Retrieved May 19, 2025, from <a href="https://esango.un.org/civilsociety/showProfileDetail.do?method=printProfile&profileCode=383&tab=1">https://esango.un.org/civilsociety/showProfileDetail.do?method=printProfile&profileCode=383&tab=1</a></p>
